# Bluebird

Bluebird is a work-in-progess imperative programming language modeled after C++ and Ada.

The goal is to create a language that supports generic programming with
very strong typing.

It is still in the early stages, but right now it has a lexer, a parser, and
a semantic analyzer. Code generation currently generates to object files, and it
creates executables on macOS only (for now). All stages of the compiler are still
a work-in-progress.

## Goals

- Ahead-of-time compiled language with native LLVM backend
- Ada-like syntax, but with less verbosity and no need for forward declarations
when defining interdependent types or functions
- Monomorphized generics with C++20-like concepts for constraining types
- First-class types
- Modules with mandatory specifications (a.k.a. header files), but no textual inclusion
- Very strong typing in the tradition of Ada, with no implicit conversions, but
with support for casting when needed
- Ranges as a core language construct, with support for user-defined ranges
- Types that can be constrained to a range
- Support for low-level operations and precise control over data representation
- Support for a large number of compile-time and run-time checks
- Support for compile-time evaluation and partial evaluation of functions
- Standard library containing useful and efficient generic data structures and algorithms
- Modular compiler implemented with minimal dependencies and a reasonable build time
- Minimally complex build environment for the compiler and a simple, standard build
system for the language itself
- Easy way to create C and C++ bindings
- Compiler tools for interacting with each stage of the compiler, potentially with a GUI

## Currently Implemented Features

- Void functions
- Variables, constants, and assignment
- If, else-if, and else statements
- Type definitions for integer types, with ranges specified (no runtime range checks yet)
- Logical, comparison, bitwise, and arithmetic operators, as well as parentheses for grouping
- Detailed error checking in the lexing and parsing stages
- Automatic resolution of variable and function names, preventing the need for forward declarations within a file

## Syntax

The syntax is very Ada-like, favoring English keywords over symbols and full words over abbreviations (where sensible). Here is a sample program:

```
type Positive is range 1 thru 500;

function fizzbuzz() is
    for n in Positive do
        if n mod 15 == 0 do
            print("fizzbuzz");
        else if n mod 3 == 0 do
            print("fizz");
        else if n mod 5 == 0 do
            print("buzz")
        else
            print_num(n);
        end if;
    end for;
end fizzbuzz; // 'fizzbuzz' label at end is optional
```

## Building

### Dependencies

- C++17 compiler
- CMake (>= 3.16.4)
- LLVM 10
- All other dependencies will be bundled into the `third_party/` directory

### Building the compiler

The build system is CMake.

To build, enter the root directory of this project, then run:

```
cd build
cmake ..
```

This will generate the build system files needed to build the project, placing
all of the generated files inside the `build` directory. On Unix-like systems
(e.g. macOS, Linux), CMake will likely generate a Makefile. If so, to build
(or rebuild) the project, enter the `build` directory and run `make -j`.

On Windows, a Visual Studio solution file will likely be generated by CMake.
Your Visual Studio IDE should be able to open and build the files generated
by CMake.

If you have any issues building the compiler, please leave a Github issue.

### Running the compiler

The compiler executable, `bluebird`, should be found in the `build` directory
after `make` finishes. Pass it a filename to compile something
(e.g. `bluebird ../examples/arithmetic.bird`). An object file with the same name (but
a `.o` extension instead of a `.bird` extension) should be produced. On macOS, a
runnable `a.out` executable will also be generated.

## License

This program is licensed under the AGPLv3 license. The text of the AGPL can be found in
the LICENSE file.

Dependencies in the `third_party/` directory may have separate licenses; refer to their
documentation/source code for more information.
